# Analysis of Gene Expression Differentiation Following Environmental Stressors

Next generation sequencing has provided opportunities to understand the molecular and genomic consequences of climate change induced environmental stressors on organisms. Specifically, RNA-seq has enabled us to understand what genes are being up- or down-regulated in response to these stressors. By analyzing gene expression data, we have a much greater understanding of the physiological consequences that have been previously described in many model species. 


## Project Objectives

In this project, I intend to develop scripts that will:
* Clean RNA-seq reads and align them to a reference genome (bash)


These analyses will consist of RNA-seq data extracted from the common mouse species, *Mus musculus*, that was exposed to two separate treatment groups. 


# All Input Files

Each function in this script requires input files of a specific format. This section will guide users through the proper implementation of each function. Function names are bolded and italicized. 

***quality_check***
* raw .fastqc.gz files

***trim_reads***
* raw .fastqc.gz files

***qc_trimmed***
* val_1.fq.gz files that were generated by the *trim_reads* function

***mapping***
* .fasta genome file (must be unzipped)
* .gtf genome transcripts file (must be unzipped)
* val_1.fq.gz files that were generated by the *trim_reads* function



# All Output Files

Throughout these scripts, many output files are generated by used of several programs. The following section contains descriptions of what will be contained in each of these files. Bolded filenames are important contributors to further analyses. 

## FastQC (Fast Quality Checks)
* **FILENAME_fastqc.html** : Contains all quality check information. Having good read quality is essential prior to further analysis.
* FILENAME_fastqc.zip : a compress version of the .html file 

## TrimGalore
* SAMPLENAME_filtered_R1.fastq.gz_trimming_report.txt : provides summary of read statistics from each file. 
* **SAMPLENAME_filtered_R1_val_1.fq.gz** : trimmed reads file that can be mapped to reference

## STAR (Spliced Transcripts Alignement to a Reference)
* **Aligned.out.sam** : Alignments to the genome in standard SAM format.
* **Log.out** : Main log file with a lot of detailed information about the run. This file is most useful for troubleshooting and debugging.
* **Log.progress.out** : Reports job progress statistics, such as the number of processed reads, % of mapped reads etc.
* **Log.final.out** :  Summary mapping statistics after mapping job is complete, very useful for quality control. The statistics are calculated for each read (single- or paired-end) and then summed or averaged over all reads.
* **ReadsPerGene.out.tab** : 4 columns - 1) gene ID, 2) counts for unstranded RNA-seq, 3) counts for the 1st read strand aligned with RNA, 4) counts for the 2nd read strand aligned with RNA.
* SJ.out.tab : Contains high confidence collapsed splice junctions in tab-delimited format. 
* chrLength.txt : 1 column - length in base pairs of each chromosome
* chrNameLength.txt : 2 columns - 1) chromosome name and 2) chromosome length
* **chrName.txt** : 1 column - chromosome names. After indexing the genome, you can change the chromosome names in this file while keeping the same order. The names in this file will be used in all output alignment files (i.e. Alignment.out.sam).
* chrStart.txt : 1 column - starting point of each chromosome in order
* exonGeTrInfo.tab : position of exons (based on transcript file [.gtf])
* exonInfo.tab : length of exons
* geneInfo.tab : empty
* **Genome** : Comprise binary genome sequence, suffix arrays, text chromosome names/lengths, splice junctions coordinates, and transcripts/genes information. Most of these files use internal STAR format and are not intended to be utilized by the end user.
* genomeParameters.txt : User input parameters for STAR to run, including defaults
* **SA** : Suffix Array (a sorted array of all suffixes of a string)
* **SAindex** : Indexed representation of Genome
* sjdbInfo.txt : transcript length (set by user, based on sequencing adapters, Illumina is 99)
* sjdbList.fromGTF.out.tab : empty
* sjdbList.out.tab : empty
* transctiptInfo.tab : all transcripts 


## Box Folder
Here is the link to the Box Folder with our data: https://auburn.box.com/s/x17154cah63h3yp4wd14ak6p0fa3t5jz
